Soldiers Home Guided Walking Tour Script 
Updated July 2021


OVERVIEW / INTRODUCTION: 
Thank you for partnering with the Milwaukee Preservation Alliance to increase awareness of and engagement with the Milwaukee Soldiers Home through guided walking tours. The following tour guidance is meant to be a tool for you as you prepare to guide a tour. The information in this document has been reviewed for accuracy and will be updated as necessary to ensure it includes the most timely information. If you see something in this document that you believe should be updated / added or fact-checked, please contact Elizabeth at ehummitzsch@muellercommunications.com.


HOW TO USE THIS DOCUMENT
The tour outlined below is comprehensive. You may wish to alter the tour content to best meet the interests of your group and the time available for a tour (for example, you may wish to group buildings together vs. walking to each, and / or to talk about clusters of buildings). Please feel free to rearrange this tour as you see fit. You are also encouraged to put it in your own words / style - however, please be sure not to compromise the accuracy of this information. 


Please do not make edits directly in this document, but make a copy and edit the new copy.  


REMINDERS TO SHARE WITH YOUR GROUP PRIOR TO BEGINNING THE TOUR:
Please remember the Soldiers Home grounds are active, and the majority of the buildings are in use. Please encourage your group to respect the privacy of veterans who live and receive care at the Soldiers Home. While respecting the privacy of veterans on the grounds, we do encourage you to take pictures and videos, share them on social media and help us spread the word about this remarkable historic asset.


SCRIPT:


INTRODUCTION: IN FRONT OF FOUNTAIN


Hello, and welcome to the Milwaukee Soldiers Home. 


Before we begin the tour, I want to tell you a little bit about the Milwaukee Preservation Alliance and the Save the Soldiers Home effort. The Milwaukee Preservation Alliance, or MPA, is a non-profit organization devoted to promoting stewardship and awareness of the historic, cultural, and economic value of Milwaukee’s built heritage. For more than a decade, MPA has been hard at work on an effort to Save the Soldiers Home. 


In 2011, MPA successfully nominated the Milwaukee Soldiers Home District to the National Trust for Historic Preservation’s 11 Most Endangered Historic Places list, bringing national attention to the District and jumpstarting the preservation effort that we’ll see firsthand today. The momentum from the designation spurred MPA’s work in partnership with the National Trust for Historic Preservation, Wisconsin Historical Society, National Park Service and others to create a framework and vision for rehabilitation of the Soldiers Home’s vacant buildings.
  
Backed by the support and involvement of local stakeholders, MPA outlined a vision for the District and set out to educate the community about the Soldiers Home and the veteran needs that could be met through the rehabilitation of its buildings. 
 
MPA’s “Save the Soldiers Home” campaign reached a critical milestone when, in 2016, the Department of Veterans Affairs sought a developer to rehabilitate a number of the District's unused historic buildings. A team led by The Alexander Company and the Housing Authority of the City of Milwaukee was chosen by the VA, and MPA stepped in to help fundraise and manage the three million dollar capital campaign necessary to fill the project's financing gap.
 
Thanks to the rehabilitation project, MPA’s vision became a reality with the unprecedented successful rehabilitation and reuse of Old Main and five other historic buildings as homeless veteran housing.


As we’ll talk about today, this project is only the start. 


As we begin our tour today, let’s talk more generally about how the Soldiers Home got its start.


The National Home for Disabled Volunteer Soldiers was established by Congress in 1865 and signed into law as one of President Lincoln’s final acts. The legislation officially set forth the concern and commitment of the federal government for the well-being of the civilian soldier, and set forth a network of 11 soldiers homes, built over the course of several years. The Milwaukee Soldiers Home is one of the original three homes and has the most buildings and features remaining.  


There’s a special reason Milwaukee is home to one of the original Soldiers Homes. During the Civil War, beginning in 1861, a group of women formed the West Side Soldiers’ Aid Society and worked to provide care and transitional housing to returning Civil War veterans in Wisconsin. They focused on assisting discharged soldiers with meals, medical care and temporary housing in rented buildings located in downtown Milwaukee. Without any formal system in place to care for the unprecedented number of sick, disabled and displaced soldiers, the West Side Soldiers' Aid Society began planning a permanent facility in the area that would provide long-term solutions for Wisconsin veterans. Their vision was to create a home where Wisconsin veterans could receive medical treatment, housing and vocational training.


At that time, fundraising fairs were popular and festive events designed to support the Union Army. The Society organized a remarkable public event known as the Soldiers' Home Fair. Originally scheduled for a ten-day run, the Fair opened in Milwaukee on June 28, 1865 and ran until the end of July. In that time, the fair committee raised more than 100 thousand dollars, a significant amount of money for the time. 


In the meantime, President Lincoln signed the legislation to create a national system of homes for disabled veterans. In 1866, when the federal government began selecting sites for branches of the homes, local businessmen and politicians lobbied to construct a branch in Milwaukee. Eventually, the women of the West Side Soldiers Aid Society were persuaded to give up their plans and transfer assets to the federal government for the purchase of the land we’re on today. 


As you’ll see on our tour, this district is rather large. As it currently stands, there are nearly 50 historic resources, including the large institutional buildings around us, along with homes, garages, sheds, fountains and more, all spread over more than 90 acres. When the Soldiers Home was founded in 1867, it was much larger – 375 acres – and it had even more features that we’ll talk about as we walk the grounds.  


Speaking of the grounds, it’s important to note that the grounds themselves are special. These grounds were intentionally designed with winding pathways and groves of trees to provide a place of peace for recuperating soldiers.


Well-known landscape architect, Thomas Budd Van Horne, laid out the grounds of the Soldiers Home following design principles made popular in the mid-1800’s, called the Picturesque Movement. The curving roads were meant to link a series of scenic views that would appeal to the veteran residents and serve as Milwaukee’s first major public park.


The pathways, expansive open lawns and sparkling lakes that once covered the campus were well known in Milwaukee, and visitors came every weekend to walk around and appreciate the spacious grounds. 


THE SOLDIERS HOME FOUNTAIN: IN FRONT OF FOUNTAIN


We will start the tour here at the fountain.


This cast iron fountain was designed by Caspar Hennecke. On July 9, 1878, Hennecke and Company finished and placed the fountain on these grounds. It still remains in its original location.


The central statue with figurines and basin appear to be unchanged. In 2002, volunteers removed numerous layers of white paint and restored damaged parts of this fountain. 


In addition to the fountain, the front of Old Main once featured cannons. The flower beds on either side of the fountain are actually on top of the old cannon mounts. These cannons were fired at sunrise and sunset each day, with a booming sound that echoed throughout the surrounding City of Milwaukee. 


OLD MAIN: IN FRONT OF FOUNTAIN


Right now we’re standing in front of the Main Building or “Old Main” as it’s called. This five-story Victorian Gothic style building – distinguished by its pointed arch window shapes – was meant to contribute to the Picturesque charm of the landscape and was strategically positioned on the highest point in the district to take advantage of breezes and the landscape of the area. 


Old Main was considered the grandest of all the buildings on the campus, and in the evening, its many windows sparkled and shone brightly into the night, illuminating the grounds below. It remains the centerpiece of the site – its majestic towers are visible for miles.


The building’s site atop a knoll was part of the landscape plan so the Main Building would overlook the rest of the Soldiers Home. Attractive architecture and grounds were intended to instill pride in the veterans staying here. The building, completed in 1869, was designed by famed Milwaukee architect, Edward Townsend Mix, who also designed many of the most prominent buildings in Milwaukee, including the Grain Exchange Building, Plankinton House, the Mitchell building  and the Chicago, Milwaukee and St. Paul Depot. 


This Main Building was a domiciliary -- for patient living and care -- and was meant to hold all the functions of the Soldiers Home, including administrative offices. The first floor included the dispensary, hospital, matron’s room, library, surgeon’s room and a sitting room for residents. There was also a dining room in the rear of the building and a bathing and laundry room in the basement. The sleeping areas on the second, third and fourth floors of the building were dorm-style rooms with common gathering spaces.


Old Main originally had a 500-bed capacity, but the building quickly became overcrowded. In the late 1800s, it served as the living quarters for nearly 1,000 veterans. The end towers were added in 1876, and the four corner towers still retain their original iron roof cresting.


In recent years, Old Main was vacated and fell into disrepair. At one point part of the roof collapsed, exposing the historic building to the elements. However, thanks to a decade-long effort, today Old Main is once again home to veterans.


Thanks to a significant rehabilitation project made possible through the Save the Soldiers Home effort spearheaded by MPA and its many partners, Old Main has been restored to its former glory. Today, Old Main includes 80 housing units for homeless and at-risk veterans.  




SOLDIERS HOME REEF: NORTHEAST SIDE OF OLD MAIN, ON WAY TO SOLDIERS HOME CHAPEL


I want to take a moment to pause here to tell you about the Soldiers Home Reef. You can see the top of it here to the northeast of Old Main. 


It is a 70-foot-high fossil reef that grew approximately 400 million years ago. This rock mound in the Menomonee River Valley was discovered in 1834 by Increase A. Lapham, Wisconsin's first scientist. In 1862, they were the first ancient reefs described in North America and among the first described anywhere in the world. 


Long before the entire district received the NHL designation, the Soldiers Home Reef was named a National Historic Landmark. It has held the designation since 1993. 


Though American Family Field is located near the Soldiers Home Reef, the construction of the Stadium did not affect the reef. A fence between the reef and the Brewer's Stadium parking lot protects the landmark.




BARRACKS BUILDING: NORTHEAST SIDE OF BARRACKS BUILDING
This building is a barracks designed by Henry C. Koch (pronounced cook), the same architect who designed Milwaukee’s beautiful City Hall, the Pfister Hotel and Turner Hall. He also designed the Chapel and the Ward Theater, here on the grounds which we’ll be seeing shortly. 


Built in 1888, this barracks building was designed in a straightforward Italianate style, as seen in the tall windows capped with arches. Its most outstanding architectural feature is its two-tiered, open porch. It is very similar to another barracks building we’ll be seeing in just a few minutes. 


        
FIRE ENGINE HOUSE & CHIEF ENGINEER’S QUARTERS: FRONT OF FIRE ENGINE HOUSE & CHIEF ENGINEERS QUARTERS
Here we see the Fire Engine House and Chief Engineers Quarters, which housed the Home’s local fire department for more than 50 years. It was built in 1883 of Cream City brick, which was made right here in Milwaukee. If you look on the east side of the building you can see the shapes of the original firehouse doors. On the first floor, there are two large elliptical arches. Below these arches are two sets of triple, double-hung windows. These replaced the original double doors of the Engine House that opened to let the fire trucks move in and out. 


When the City of Milwaukee Fire Department started providing service to the Home, this building was remodeled into townhouse quarters for staff. Today, veterans enrolled in the Compensated Work Therapy Transitional Residential Program reside here. This is a 10-bed program, which focuses on reducing homelessness among veterans. Each veteran has vocational placement in his or her treatment plan, and the ultimate goal is reentry into the community.




SOLDIERS HOME CHAPEL: IN BETWEEN SOLDIERS HOME CHAPEL AND SURGEON’S QUARTERS
The Soldiers Home Chapel is a multi-denominational church built in 1889. It was paid for with “Post Funds,” which included profits from the operation of the Home Store, beer sales, the sales of products made or grown at the branch, gifts, bequests, and unpaid pensions of members who died without wills or heirs. This chapel served as a place of prayer, refuge and true patriotism. 


The chapel characterizes the residential cluster of buildings bordering the Wood National Cemetery at the northwest side of the district. The chapel was joined by a grouping of residential quarters for officers and nurses in this corner of the campus. If you turn around, there are three of these quarters buildings located across the street. These three duplexes were recently renovated and now serve as veteran housing for homeless and at-risk veterans. 


The Soldiers Home Chapel was designed by famed Milwaukee architect Henry C. Koch (pronounced cook). Its wood-frame building displays some Queen Anne style architectural features, which tend to be asymmetrical shapes with different wall textures, such as patterned wood shingles shaped into varying designs as you see here. The chapel was built in the shape of a cross and features a bell tower adorned with siding of alternating patterns of clapboard and shingles. 


Located on the roof ridge west of the bell tower is the central steeple. Much shorter and slimmer than the tower, the central steeple was designed to complement the bell tower. 


The chapel hosts two elaborate stained glass windows that overlook a veranda on the south side of the chapel, offering a peaceful atmosphere for veterans who used the facility. 


At the west end of the chapel, three stained glass windows depicting Mary, St. John and Christ are displayed. Most of the stained glass windows have dedicatory insets in memory of families and individuals who donated to the chapel. 


The chapel remained in use until 1996. Since that time, all religious services have been held in the Main Hospital chapel.  


Today, the Soldiers Home Chapel is vacant and in critical need of stabilization and repair. The Milwaukee Preservation Alliance is at work to identify the best path forward to rehabilitate the Chapel and return it to the service of veterans.


SECRETARY AND SURGEON’S QUARTERS: IN BETWEEN SOLDIERS HOME CHAPEL AND SURGEON’S QUARTERS
Next door to the Chapel is the Secretary and Surgeon’s Quarters. 


This unique Colonial Revival residence was built in 1887 to house Soldiers Home doctors and was part of an effort to create a village setting where residents, patients and caregivers all lived and worked.


Over the years, this building has housed various officers and hospital staff. From 1990 to early 2000, a state licensed child care center operated here. 


In 2005, the City of Milwaukee Housing Authority partnered with the Hope House and the Milwaukee VA to repair the exterior and transform the interior into a home facility serving homeless veterans. It is now a group home with 13 separate bedrooms to provide rehabilitation services for homeless residents with priority placement for veterans. 




BUILDING 14 CATHOLIC CHAPLAIN’S QUARTERS: IN FRONT OF BUILDING 14
The building southwest of the Chapel was built in 1909 as the Catholic Chaplain’s Quarters. On the interior, the second floor bedrooms are served by two separate staircases. They were originally designed to limit interaction between the chaplain and the housekeeper. The home was recently rehabilitated and is currently used for veteran housing.




WOOD NATIONAL CEMETERY: IN FRONT OF BUILDING 14
As you can see, the Catholic Chaplain’s Quarters are adjacent to Wood National Cemetery. 


Wood National Cemetery opened for use in 1871 and was designed by Thomas B. Van Horne as part of the Soldiers Home picturesque landscape. It was originally known as the Soldiers Home Cemetery, and the design was created with no one section being more prominent than any of the others in order to create a sense of unity. Graves are laid out in straight rows with upright granite headstones.


The cemetery makes up the western boundary of the Milwaukee Soldiers Home and was designed with peace, calm and serenity in mind. Many of the cemetery’s paths lead through lush vegetation and provide a true retreat for members and visitors.


Today, the cemetery is home to 37,000 graves, a portion of which are visible from almost every building on campus. Veterans of every conflict except the American Revolution are buried here, including members of the famed Massachusetts 54th Infantry Regiment and the US Cavalry “Buffalo Soldiers.” Other graves include those of the U.S. Colored Troops from Wisconsin, and five Medal of Honor recipients. 




OLD HOSPITAL: IN FRONT OF OLD HOSPITAL BUILDING
Designed in 1879, the Old Hospital was the first building on campus to be designed by Milwaukee Architect Henry C. Koch (pronounced Cook). The hospital was situated to complement the other buildings in the core cluster near Old Main. 


As we walk along the exterior of the building, you’ll see it was designed as three separate pavilions connected by corridors. The center pavilion housed the administrative offices, treatment facilities and operating rooms. Patient wards were located in the two side pavilions and were the full width of the pavilion, allowing for cross ventilation and light throughout the day. Those original east and west wards were identical and still retain their basic form. Bright, fresh flowers from the on-campus greenhouse were used to adorn many of the hospital’s rooms and common areas.


In 1886 and 1898, two additional wings were added to the west side of the building. One wing remains and the other was demolished for the existing surface parking lot. As we make our way around the building, note the large porches on the far west wing. They allowed patients with tuberculosis to have access to plenty of fresh air, which was considered beneficial. Since then, several of the hospital’s original porches have been removed or covered.


In 1938, after all hospital care moved to Building 70 at the south end of the grounds; this building was converted to a barracks for domiciliary members. The VA Regional Office called Building 6 home from 1983 to 2004. The interior has been renovated, and in recent years a number of VA offices were moved here.




BARRACKS BUILDING: IN FRONT OF SOCIAL HALL
This building might look familiar, because it is very similar to the barracks building we saw earlier. In1884, the Soldiers Home admission policy changed to allow all disabled Veterans, not just those injured in war, into the Home. The new admission policy required immediate construction of additional housing to meet the increased need, including construction of additional barracks. Like the other barracks building we’ve already seen, this building is currently used by the VA for office space. 




RECREATION/SOCIAL HALL: IN FRONT OF RECREATION / SOCIAL HALL
Still in use by the VA today, the Social Hall, also called the recreation building, was built to complement the other recreational buildings located in this southwest cluster of the grounds. Constructed in 1894 in the Colonial Revival style, with its symmetrical shape and classical columns, the Social Hall provided veterans with a place for recreational activities such as card playing and billiards. It also housed a ballroom. 


The first floor was used as a social room for the members of the Veterans’ Social Club. The second floor contained a kitchen and a Grand Army of the Republic Post. The walls were covered with pictures of war scenes and portraits of prominent generals, admirals and other people famous in military and naval history. 


The Hall was remodeled in 1931 to add 40 beds and a bowling alley in the basement. The bowling alley still operates today. The VA made further changes to the interior in 2004-05 to create VA office space. Though there are few preserved interior historic elements, four-panel doors with original hardware, plaster walls and ceilings, and a newel post with inset beaded panels remain.




WADSWORTH LIBRARY: IN FRONT OF LIBRARY
Here we have the Wadsworth Library. Similar to the Chapel, the library was paid for with general post funds raised through the sale of various items from the stores that were on the grounds at the time, including beer sales. The basement walls of the library are constructed of Wisconsin limestone, and the remainder of the building is Milwaukee cream city brick. 

The first floor is a large room that is open to the second story skylight. Here, the veterans could choose from a wide variety of the leading magazines and newspapers of the time, or they could sit at one of two large tables that provided pen and ink for correspondence.    


The second story is not a full floor, but is a balcony that wraps around and looks down onto the reading room. It contains large walnut bookcases, several of which are the originals from the reading room in Old Main. In 1924, the balcony was home to 12,000 volumes including history, fiction, science, biographies and books of reference. A narrow winding stairway is used for access to the balcony. A dumbwaiter is used to bring books and supplies to the upstairs shelving and reading area. 

During peak periods in domiciliary use, the basement of the library served as additional barracks space. 


Today, the building is unused but does retain many of its historic elements, including terrazzo (pronounced Te-rah-zoe) floors in the men’s room, plaster walls, original doors and door hardware, as well as heavily molded door trim. Additionally, the chain-operated dumbwaiter for books continues to connect the main level to the balcony level. 






THE ADMINISTRATION BUILDING: IN FRONT OF ADMINISTRATION BUILDING - ON PATH LEADING TO WARD HALL
The Soldiers Home Administration Building - sometimes called the headquarters building - resides in the administrative-recreation cluster of buildings, all of which were designed to maintain a visual focus on Old Main. The cluster of buildings includes Ward Memorial Hall, where we’ll head next, Wadsworth Library, the Social Hall and the Administration building. This building arrangement maintained the picturesque landscape setting to the east, while also providing close proximity to the hospitals and barracks for the veterans. 


Built in 1896 as a part of the “Building Boom” along with other core buildings in the institutional area, the Headquarters’ exterior is cream color-painted brick, making its appearance consistent with its neighboring buildings.


The Administration Building contained the offices of the Governor, treasurer, quartermaster, adjutant, clerical staff, commissary officer, chief guard and the fire marshal. The upper story of this building contained reading and sleeping quarters for clerks who were civilian employees. The basement contained the print shop. It served as the VA center main office until 1942, after which it housed the domiciliary staff office and the campus post office. Today, the mailboxes from the original post office remain. 


Along with Old Main, the Administration Building was part of a rehabilitation project that transformed the historic building into housing for 14 veterans and their families who are homeless or at risk of being homeless.




WARD MEMORIAL HALL: IN FRONT OF WARD MEMORIAL HALL
In addition to the Soldiers Home Chapel and the Secretary and Surgeon’s Quarters, Milwaukee architect Henry C. Koch (pronounced Cook) designed Ward Memorial Hall, arguably his most celebrated creation in the district.


Ward Memorial Hall was constructed in 1881 and named for Horatio Ward, an American Banker and patriot who created an endowment fund to construct memorial halls for the Soldiers Homes. The intent was to provide the Home’s members with cultural activities such as concerts, theatrical performances, and lectures, and allow them to socialize, relax and enjoy recreation time with one another.


This two-and-a-half story building is constructed of Cream City brick. The hall is designed in New Renaissance style, which is characterized by round arches and symmetrical windows. It was originally a multi-purpose building with a flat-floored hall, serving as a theater, amusement hall, restaurant, home store, post office and place of worship. At one point, it even housed veterans when membership exceeded space in the barracks.


The striking Victorian Gothic-style building is located immediately south of the former railroad line. In fact, Ward Memorial Hall had a passenger waiting room that serviced railroad passengers. A ticket window – the bow window on the rear porch – was used to serve rail passengers at this major stop on the main line of the Milwaukee Road connecting Chicago, Milwaukee, Madison and Prairie du Chien. The train tracks were removed in 2007, and the area is now part of the Hank Aaron State Trail.


During an 1898 renovation, the hall was rebuilt to its present configuration with balconies, a sloped floor, new seats and an orchestra pit, and was used solely as a theater. In the late 1920s and early 1930s, additional enhancements were made to allow for the showing of motion pictures. Acoustical tiles were added to the first floor walls, and veterans painted pastoral scenes on them, including images of the Wisconsin Dells. 


Performances at the Hall were paid for by the Home’s “Post Fund,” allowing free admission for soldiers.  


Over the years, Ward Memorial Theater has hosted many appearances by lecturers, vaudeville troupes and musicians. 


Like many buildings in this Soldiers Home district, Ward Memorial Hall still contains many of its historical features, including the 1898 balconies and stage, as well as historic theater seating. Arguably the most spectacular feature of Ward Memorial Hall was the large stained-glass portrait of General Ulysses S. Grant on horseback. It was installed in 1887 on the east side of the theater, six years after the building was completed. Looking at how the window opening is set to one side and not symmetrical on the building’s exterior, you can see how the building was altered in order to insert the prized window. In November 2011, the window was removed from the theater for safekeeping until repairs to the buildings are complete.


Today, Ward Memorial Theater is vacant and in need of rehabilitation. The Milwaukee Preservation Alliance is partnering with the VA to determine feasible reuses for this building to return it to the service of veterans.




HOSPITAL ANNEX: IN FRONT OF HOSPITAL ANNEX
It’s important to mention that there have been many changes to the district’s landscape over the years. The gatehouses are now gone, three of the original lakes have been filled in and the fourth, Lake Wheeler, was reoriented in 1966 to make room for the medical center’s main hospital. Additionally, the loss of land on the east edge of the property to American Family Field has removed some of the original landscape and interrupted the view to the east. However, the landscape and road/path system in the historic core remains.


By the late 1920’s, there was a dramatic increase in the number of patient admissions to the National Home. In July 1930, the Veterans Benefits Bureau and the National Home were consolidated into the Veterans Administration. 


The architectural projects of the Veterans Administration involved primarily the construction of hospitals designed by the Technical Service Division of the VA, rather than by local architects. Built in 1932, this building, the Hospital Annex, is one of the earliest buildings constructed by the newly formed Veterans Administration, and was used to accommodate long term, chronically ill patients.  


In 1949, the focus was changed to accommodate patients with very specialized conditions. This building was closed in the early 1960s but was renovated in 1989. The last residents of Old Main moved here on December 12, 1989 when that building closed, and it served as a domiciliary until 2012. Today it is primarily an outpatient treatment area.  




LAKE WHEELER: IN FRONT OF LAKE WHEELER
Park and recreation areas were added to the grounds in the 1870’s to 1890’s. By 1876, there were four artificial ponds or lakes on the grounds, each one surrounded on its banks by willow trees.  Lake Hincks was southeast of Old Main; Spring Lake was in the northwest corner of the grounds, near the new cemetery; a fourth unnamed lake was just northeast of Old Main, near the farmhouse and barns.


As early as 1876, Lake Wheeler contained an island lighthouse, man-high windmill and rowboats that could be rented for paddling excursions. Eventually, it had two stone pedestrian bridges and a fountain.  


In 1966, when the current hospital was under construction, the four-foot deep lake was relocated approximately 100 feet north of its former position. Lake Wheeler is the last remaining lake on the grounds.


BUILDING 70, 79, 61: IN FRONT OF LAKE WHEELER
As you look across the campus to the south of the wide valley-like area, you’ll see four large buildings located outside the historic district: the former tuberculosis hospital; the 1966 general medical and surgical hospital; a 1979 domiciliary; and the DVA regional office. Two Home era quarters also survive in this area. Subsequent new buildings constructed on the campus and their associated parking lots have changed the original forms of the buildings along with historic landscape.


After 1917 when the U.S. entered World War I, veterans benefits were expanded. In accordance with the new law, all veterans were eligible for medical treatment and hospital care — not just those residing in a National Home. Thus, new hospitals were built and existing facilities — including Soldiers Home branches — were expanded to provide medical treatment to World War I veterans.


In 1922, the Northwestern Branch opened a new $1.2-million-dollar Tuberculosis Hospital. That building is south and up the hill. Separate from the rest of the campus, it was intentionally isolated in the southwest portion of the grounds to keep tubercular patients at a distance from other members of the Home. The pavilion-style hospital echoed the design of the older hospital with multiple wings stemming from a central unit, and was connected by a long, narrow corridor. The site provided fresh air and open space necessary for the treatment of tuberculosis. 


Several officers’ quarters were also built during this period to house the growing number of staff members required to operate the Northwestern Branch. In keeping with previous precedents, they were grouped in two clusters. One group was located between the Tuberculosis Hospital and Lake Wheeler; the other was situated along the main road leading to the northern entrance of the campus. These were the final houses constructed in the north residential cluster that we saw at the beginning of the tour.


SPINAL CORD BUILDING: IN FRONT OF LAKE WHEELER 
The new building you see to the south is the Spinal cord building. The 67,000-square-foot building replaced a smaller unit in the main hospital building and has a connecting tunnel, providing access to the hospital. 


The main building of the Clement J. Zablocki VA Medical Center is to the south. It was dedicated and occupied in May 1966. The medical center delivers primary, secondary and tertiary medical care.


(As you turn and head north back to Old Main where the tour started, the oldest building that remains on campus is on your right, the Governor’s Mansion.)


GOVERNOR’S MANSION: IN FRONT OF HOSPITAL ANNEX
Located across the street, you’ll see the Governor’s Mansion. Built in 1868, The Governor’s Mansion is the oldest building remaining on campus. The residence was built for the Soldiers Home’s director, whose position was then referred to as “governor.”  


The Governor’s Mansion is located on the main road, separate from the core grouping of buildings, across from Wheeler Lake. It began as a smaller building with a mansard roof similar to the roof of Old Main. By 1916, the house was remodeled with the addition of the third floor and the replacement of the mansard roof with a hexagonal tent tower.  


The mansion’s design is attributed to architect Edward Townsend Mix, the same architect that designed Old Main. The original form of the building almost identically mirrors the architect’s own home in Milwaukee, formerly located on Waverly Place, which has since been demolished.


The 12-room home still has original window panes, stained and leaded glass windows. The interior of the Governor’s Mansion boasts a variety of outstanding and ornate details, including a walnut newel post on the main stairway. Additionally, marble surrounds hearth fireplaces in the living room, dining room and study. Much of the original hardware is also intact, including the remaining porcelain knobs.  


Today, the Governor’s Mansion is vacant and in need of renovation. The Milwaukee Preservation Alliance is at-work to help the VA identify qualified and interested developers to pursue a reuse.


CONCLUSION: IN FRONT OF SOLDIERS HOME FOUNTAIN
That concludes our tour. Though many things have changed here, many stay the same. The landscape and remaining buildings continue to inspire awe among those who venture through the district, especially veterans who receive services from the VA and who live in the recently rehabilitated Old Main, Administrative Building and duplexes. 


Thank you for taking time today to learn about the Milwaukee VA Soldiers Home Historic District. It is our sincere hope that it has captivated you as it has captivated veterans and visitors alike for more than 100 years. Please, tell a friend about your experience today, and invite them to visit the grounds and learn about this important piece of local and national history. For more information and to share your feedback, please visit SavetheSoldiersHome.com.